Case: Qwikset Business School

The prestigious Qwikset Business School MBA program offers several concentrations including Business Analytics. The school has developed three analytics courses that all students concentrating in the Business Analytics concentration must take simultaneously.

To accentuate the integrated learning of the analytics concentration, the school has, since 2019, required students to apply their knowledge of the analytics to one large case study—a hypothetical, complex, business situation. In teams of four they must analyze the case, apply appropriate analytics methodologies, and submit a detailed report (about 25 pages) along with power point slides for a presentation.

Since the teams expend a great deal of time and effort and since the case analysis counts for a quarter of the students’ grade in each of the three courses it is important that teams of equal capability are created and that the team selection process should be equitable and fair. In this regard the analytics core coordinator decided that teams should have certain characteristics. 

The main objective for the selection process was for the teams to be, on average, equally capable. As the case analysis is performed at the end of the semester (the last four weeks), the analytics core coordinator has information on the academic performance of each student up to that time. For the teams to be equitable, the average academic performance of the team should be close to the average academic performance of the cohort class as a whole. Dispersion is measured as the maximum distance of a team score from the aggregate average.

Functional diversity is another desirable trait in innovative teams. To encourage the best possible team performance, the coordinator wanted to form teams with functional diversity. Because a large number of analytics concentration students are also concentrating in finance or marketing assigning students arbitrarily might have resulted in some teams having a large number of these students. The coordinator wanted no team to contain more than two finance majors. A similar constraint was used with respect to marketing majors.

Based on previous experience the course coordinator also believed that demographic criteria were important. Therefore she postulated that no team should contain a single female or a single international student. In other words, groups should have either zero or two females. She formulated a similar constraint with respect to international students (0 or 2). A new cohort of 16 students shown in Table below are to begin their studies.
